# V4003

## NVG scene interpretation/descriptions

### Scene Interpretation

1. Density
    1. Density is the relative measure of “how many things on the ground can be seen.” An object must have sufficient size and contrast to be distinctly perceived by either central or peripheral vision.
1. Terrain Profile
    1. Terrain gradient is the contour of the terrain and can be divided into three broad categories: flat, rolling, and rough.
    1. Terrain slope is the measure of the tilt of the overall terrain. An up-slope will require more effort be devoted to flight path monitoring compared to even or down-sloping terrain.
1. Unaquired Vertical Obstructions
    1. This category includes anything that sticks up into the aircraft's flight path, such as trees, power lines, antennas, poles, or hidden hills. The reduced contrast, resolution, and FOV provided by NVGs combine to create the potentially hazardous situation of not detecting these obstructions until it is too late.

### Scene Descriptions

1. Shadows
    1. Knowing the moon angle and azimuth, combined with a thorough map study, will enhance the capability of the aircrew to use or avoid shadows as necessary.
1. Roads
    1. The ability to detect roads with NVGs depends primarily on the albedo difference between the road and the surrounding terrain. Sometimes the road itself will not be seen initially. A swath or cut through a forested area that was cleared for a road might alert aircrew to a road’s presence.
1. Water
    1. There is very little contrast between a land mass and a body of water during low light conditions. Due to the lack of terrain density, aircrew must rely heavily on flight instruments while flying over open water.
1. Open Fields
    1. Contrast is very poor in large fields covered with similar vegetation. Leaves containing chlorophyll may appear almost white. A freshly plowed field will likely have little vegetation and the roughened terrain will probably absorb, more than reflect, light energy. This combination will create a darker area.
1. Desert
    1. Most of the time, open desert presents a washed out image through NVGs due to poor contrast and poor terrain density. Gradually rising terrain and ridgelines can be particularly difficult to discern and may first be noted by a change in the RADALT. On a particularly bright night with the moon high overhead, the NVGs can begin to degain or wash out considerably, making it even more difficult to pick out what little contrast or density is available.
1. Forest
    1. Heavily forested areas may not reflect light efficiently and solid canopied forests can appear extremely dark unless the trees have leaves with high levels of chlorophyll (usually in the spring). Excellent contrast and texture differences do exist between deciduous (leafy) and coniferous (pines, firs, etc.) trees.
1. Snow
    1. Fresh, wet snow reflects about 85% of the energy incident upon it thereby providing good natural reflectivity. However, high light levels can provide excessive luminance, which, like the desert, can lower gain and degrade resolution
1. Aritificial Light Sources
    1. Highly populated areas can generate very significant levels of ambient light. Many of the discrete artificial sources exhibit overlapping halos in the NVG image. This substantially reduces contrast and detail between sources.

## terrain assessment

See Scene Interpretation

## atmospheric impact on NVG performance

1. Clouds
    1. Thinner clouds allow light through appearing invisible to NVG but can sometimes be seen with the naked eye. Thicker clouds will appear to obsure the flight path or provide shadows on the ground. Thin to thick will decieve the pilot, obscuring the 'cloud wall' of the thick part of the cloud formation. Low clouds can often hide terrain features. Be aware of degraded NVG image and scintiliation will accompany a degradation in weather.
1. Fog
    1. Generally, fog is distinguishable from clouds only in regard to distance from the ground. Fog will be accompanied by a decrease in intensity of the grounds lights. Halos will increase in size and dispersion.
1. Rain
    1. All previous discussions on water vapor, clouds, fog, absorption, and scattering are applicable here.
1. Falling/Blowing Snow
    1. As with other forms of moisture, the density of the flakes will determine how much illumination and luminance is blocked and therefore how much degradation occurs to the NVG image.
1. Sand and Dust
    1. particle size and density will determine the overall effect on NVG performance. The effect of blowing sand or dust is similar to that created by snow. Consideration should be given to utilizing instrument takeoff procedures and landing via a no-hover or sliding landing to minimize the effects of brownout.
1. Lightning
    1. However, lightning will temporarily increase illumination, enhancing the NVG image, when not directly in the FOV. The brief duration and enhanced image clarity can create the impression that objects are much closer than they really are.

## low light level considerations

1. NVG performance in conditions of low ambient illumination is characterized by decreased resolution, visual acuity, contrast, and hazard detection range.
1. LLL is currently defined by Marine Aviation Weapons and Tactics Squadron One (MAWTS-1) as 0.0022 lux.
1. When a bright light source enters the NVG FOV, BSP will be activated to reduce gain, therefore making it difficult to see anything but the light source. Visibility is further degraded by the “blooming effect” around the light source.

## NVG navigation

See RTE/CP Selection

## route/checkpoint selection

1. Cultural Area Considerations
    1. Avoid large areas of cultural lighting due to increased halo and degaining.
    1. Anticipate wires near roads, towers, and buildings.
    1. Don't use towers as CPs. Can use them as aim points.
1. Solar/Lunar Considerations
    1. Plan to transit valleys on the illuminated side as this will avoid shadows cast by terrain
    1. Avoid flying into a low rising or setting moon
1. Checkpoints
    1. Easy to identify
    1. Contrast with surrounding terrain by size, shape, color, or elevation
    1. Not near metro areas as they grow potentially disguising the checkpoint
    1. Easy to confirm with adjacent features (i.e. funneling or limiting)
    1. Should not fall within a shawdow
    1. Select prominent limiting features
    1. Note MSL of checkpoint when flying in hilly or mountainous terrain
    1. Use good intermediate checkpoints
    1. First and last CPs are most important should the route need to be altered

## NVG map preparation
