# I4403

1. Execute Missed Approach
5.3.5.5 Final Approach Abnormalities During Radar Approaches
The controller shall issue instructions to execute a missed approach or to climb and maintain a specific altitude and
fly a specified course whenever the completion of a safe approach is questionable because one or more of the
following conditions exist:
a. Safe limits are exceeded or radical aircraft deviations are observed.
b. Position or identification of the aircraft is in doubt.
c. Radar contact is lost or a malfunctioning radar is suspected.
d. Field conditions, conflicting traffic, or other unsafe conditions observed from the tower prevent approach
completion.

5.3.5.6 Execution of the Missed Approach
a. Execution of the missed approach by the pilot is not necessary for paragraphs 5.3.5.5.a through 5.3.5.5.c above
if the pilot has the runway or approach/runway lights in sight. In these cases, controller phraseology shall be:
“(reason). If runway/approach lights/runway lights are not in sight, execute missed approach (alternate
instructions).” Reasons may include radar contact lost, too high/low for safe approach, or too far right/left for
safe approach.
b. Execution of the missed approach is mandatory for paragraph 5.3.5.5.d above. Controller phraseology is
“Execute missed approach,” and the reason for the order (i.e., Aircraft ahead of you has taken the arresting gear);
or the controller may issue instructions to climb and maintain a specific altitude and fly a specified heading and
the reason for such instructions.
Note: Pilots may execute a missed approach at their own discretion at any time.


1. Weather Sources
Preflight
FWB
1-800-WXBRIEF

Inflight
FSS (EFAS) En Route Flight Advisory Service
TWEB Transcribed Weather Broadcast
HIWAS Hazardous Inflight Weather Advisory Service
METRO Pilot-to-Metro
AWOS (Automated Weather Observation System)
    -A includes altimeter
    -AV alt and vis
    -1 alt, wind, t/d, da
    -2 1 + vis
    -3 2 + clouds/celing
    -3P 3 + precip
    -3PT 3P + ts
    -3T 3 + ts
    -4 3 + precip occur/type/accumulation, freezing rain, ts, rwy sfc sensors
ASOS Automated Surface Observation System
ATIS Automatic Terminal Information Service
